Good morning.
How's everybody doing this morning?
That's very exciting.
Actually, after that party last night,
I'd say that's a good
energy level to have.
Everybody enjoy the party last night?
[Transcript missing]
Before we get started,
let me just do the old poll thing.
How many folks in the
room are brand new to EOF?
Okay, so we got a few folks.
Excellent.
And how many folks would
say you're intermediate?
Okay, great.
And how many of your advanced folks
are just here to make trouble?
Oh, yeah!
Great.
Excellent!
OK.
So what we're going to
be doing in this session,
to get rolling, is we're going to do,
for folks who are brand new,
a bit of the basics.
So you get your mind around a
little bit about what EOF is about.
And then we're going to
cover some advanced topics.
We're also going to do
an architecture review,
which is helpful for the new folks.
But also I find that when you're
talking about advanced topics,
it's really good to have kind of
the picture of what's going on in
EOF clearly and freshly in your head.
So first, let's do the basics review.
So the Enterprise Objects Framework.
What is this thing?
So the basic idea,
it's an object persistence framework.
Largely, the goal here is that you can
look at it one of two ways.
Either you have this lovely
object-oriented WebObjects application,
and then you need some place over
the network for the information
that you've collected from users
or want to display to users.
You need a spot for that to persist,
and a relational database
is a very good spot.
Or the other way is usually more
often you already have a database,
and you want to pull the information out,
but you'd like to deal with it
in a nice object-oriented manner
in a WebObjects application,
and EOF fits the bill.
So it uses object-relational mapping.
Mapping we'll see in a moment
from an object model to a
relational database model.
And the goal, or a goal,
is that rather than thinking a lot
about what SQL joins am I doing?
And what foreign keys?
And all this kind of
database-specific stuff,
to try to use objects that
you've gotten from the database
in as OO a manner as possible.
So in a nutshell,
we're going from a row in
the database to an object,
and then make some changes to it maybe,
and then make sure it gets
back in the correct state.
That, in a nutshell,
is the crux of what EOF is doing.
Should be easy, right?
All right,
so let's talk about some terms.
Entities and attributes.
So an entity refers to essentially a
class in your object model which will
map to a table or view in the database.
An attribute is mapping a column in the
table to a property or think of it as an
instance variable in the object model.
And then relationships in an object
model are typically done by reference.
In this case, an employee is referring
to one department.
But of course,
when we go to a database model,
we're using a join.
So a foreign key,
in this case in the employee table,
is mapping to the primary
key of the department.
And it's EOF's job to allow you to work
with objects largely in this fashion,
where you're setting the
department of that employee.
And then when you save those changes,
of course you want it to translate
to the proper join in the database.
So what are Enterprise Objects?
We talked about what the framework is.
Well, you'll hear them referred
to all the time as EOs.
All that that means largely
is that they implement the
EO Enterprise Object Interface.
Typically, you don't implement
that interface yourself.
Any of you troublemakers,
have you ever implemented the
EO Enterprise Object Interface yourself?
No, nobody.
Nobody ever has.
It comes with the framework.
You don't need to do so.
Typically, you subclass EO generic record
and put your own custom logic
in there if you need to.
But largely,
you can think of an Enterprise Object as
just an object like any other,
except having all the
additional functionality to
have built-in persistence.
Now, especially when you first
start working with EOF,
the first thing you're going to encounter
is defining a model to map between that
object model and the relational database.
And we do that in a
tool called EO Modeler,
and we'll see a demo of it in a moment.
Actually, we will see it in a moment.
Where did my demo slide go?
Well, regardless,
it seems to have disappeared.
Let's cut over to demo one, if we could.
All right.
We're going to build a model from
scratch in a tool called EOModeler.
We're going to use an existing database
that a few of you might be familiar with.
So we connect using JDBC to
a wide range of databases.
We just need a JDBC URL, which I have.
Let me click in the field there.
We're using an open-based
database which has some examples,
including one that contains some movies.
And as we pick that URL,
EOModeler takes a peek into the database,
asks us a few things,
and we're just concerned about
assigning primary keys to
everything that gets pulled in.
And then we get a list of all the tables.
We're going to choose
Movie as one of the tables.
But as, I don't know,
can anybody tell me what a
movie might be related to?
That's right, a studio.
Every movie is related to a studio.
So we're going to pull
in these two tables.
As we hit next and dismiss the wizard,
EOModeler has read the schema and
reverse engineered the database and
given us the beginnings of a model.
So if we take a look
first at the model itself,
you'll notice that it is mapping
a table name to a class name,
in this case, a generic record,
which is a generic class that can
be any type of entity as long as you
don't need to add any custom behavior.
So we have a movie and a studio.
If we take a look at a movie,
you'll notice that a movie
has various items here.
Let's pick one, such as the title.
If we inspect it,
you'll notice that this attribute is
mapping the name of this attribute to
a particular column in the database.
In the database,
it's a car with a width of 255.
Internally, we'll be using a string
to represent this item.
The same is true if we take a look at,
say, a number or a date.
It's just a mapping between a column
in the database and its data type
and a name of an attribute in our
object model and its data type.
And then finally,
we can take a look at a relationship.
Looking at the foreign
keys and primary keys,
EO Modeler has figured out that
a movie is related to a studio.
In this case, it has a 2-1 relationship.
And if we take a look,
you'll notice that it
has already chosen a 2-1.
It's related to a studio.
And it is mapping the foreign key,
the studio ID,
To the studio ID of the studio.
And once we set that join
information up in EO Modeler,
At that point,
we no longer have to worry about
those foreign keys and primary keys,
as EOF will take care of that.
We'll save that as movies,
put it on the desktop.
Now we'll close the model.
Actually, let's look at one other thing.
The fact that right here from EOModeler,
I can make sure that I do
have a good connection to the
database by browsing the model.
And I'm taking a look now at all of
the movies that are in our database.
Great.
Okay.
Now, that's interesting,
but you're not going to give you
a modeler out to everybody who
wants to look in your database.
You're going to build a web application.
So let's go to Xcode.
We'll make a small, quick project.
We'll use a display group
application since it'll quickly
build a user interface for us,
and walk through the wizard.
We'll call it Demo Woe.
We're not going to
deploy it in a servlet.
We're not going to use web services.
But we are going to use JDBC.
So that is the adapter we'll
choose to connect to the database.
We don't need any additional frameworks,
but we do need to choose
the model we just created.
Pick that model, choose it,
and now it'll ask us some
questions regarding the first
page of this application as
we build its user interface.
So, the movie entity.
Let's get a table and matching
records so we can do a search,
so we don't get them all at once.
What attributes do we want to display?
Let's display a couple.
First, the title.
Let's do the category,
what date it was released,
as well as how much revenue it took in.
And finally,
let's traverse that relationship
to the related studio and
display the studio's name.
What attributes do we want to display?
Let's display a couple.
First, the title.
Let's do the category,
what date it was released,
as well as how much revenue it took in.
And finally,
let's traverse that relationship
to the related studio and
display the studio's name.
There we go.
Okay.
If we take a peek at this.
will bring up the editor.
You'll notice that we really
have no code going on here.
Take a look at the application file.
A user session file.
It's just a constructor.
And then in a WebObjects application,
we use components to represent pages.
And in the main component,
which is the first one that's
displayed in a WebObjects application,
we do not have any additional
code except for some variables
to hold a display group,
which displays the array of objects,
and the movie itself.
Let's open up the component
in WebObjects Builder where
we define the user interface.
And you'll notice that it's created
for us a user interface with a search
field as well as a table view to display
all of the movies that it's found.
Let's clean up some of these names.
That's the one that bothers me the most
because it's got that dot in there.
Let's center everything.
That wasn't center.
There we go.
And let's run this application.
So it's building and
running the application.
And what we're going to see
is a web page displayed,
and we'll be able to search and display
the information from within the database,
primarily using the information that was
generated and put into that model file.
So we can search for movies.
Okay, I guess I didn't center that puppy.
Let's go back and center it.
There we go.
And let's look for action movies.
There are all of our action movies.
You'll notice that we have the title,
the category,
the date released using a date formatter,
so you can easily format that to
whatever display string you wish.
Revenue using a number formatter,
so you can automatically format that
to whatever number format you wish.
And then traversing the relationship
from a movie table over to studios
and getting the related studio name.
And if we type in nothing,
we should get all of the movies,
of which we have a number.
That's an introduction of
how you can begin using EOF,
primarily starting by generating
a model and then building a simple
project to get your feet wet with
using the model and seeing how
it interacts with the database.
Thanks.
That's it for that demo.
Okay.
So now we've got the
introduction out of the way.
Let's talk a little bit about
the architecture of EOF and
how it's doing all that stuff.
Because that does look like there's
a lot of heavy lifting being done
behind the scenes that obviously
I did not have to do in that demo.
A lot of it does have to
do with this configuration.
Andreas likes to say that you need to
spend quality time with your model.
And that is true.
Because a lot of what EOF is
doing is based on what that
model is configured to do,
how that mapping is configured,
and the details of that model.
So let's take a look at this,
what we call the EOF stack,
starting with a database,
pre-existing quite often, and the model.
Now the model you think
if it's so important,
why isn't it in the middle?
Well really the model is
configuration information.
And it's being used as a reference so
the rest of the stack knows what to do.
In fact, you could potentially
have multiple models,
each model referring to
a different data source.
So you could have one looking up
directory information using JNDI and
another using JDBC to hit a database.
Actually,
I have an app that does such a thing.
Since you can have multiple models,
there's a class called the Model Group,
which we won't talk about much,
but its main purpose in life is
to manage the fact that there are
more than one models potentially.
That model group is referred to
by the Object Store Coordinator.
And as we'll see as we talk,
the Object Store Coordinator is,
you can refer to it as the root object,
or it's kind of the
center of an EOF stack.
It's got some stuff going on above
it and some stuff going on below it,
but it's really doing a
lot of the coordination,
thus its name.
It's also kind of the choke
point for doing things like
multi-threading and concurrent access.
Essentially,
that Object Store Coordinator is
the centerpiece of an EOF stack.
Now going up the stack,
because this is the object
that as in using EOF you will
most often interact with,
is the editing context.
And the editing context
is the go-to object.
If EOF were a movie,
the editing context would
be the leading man or woman.
I don't know which.
We've never established the
gender of the editing context.
Andreas, any?
No preference.
So the editing context is your go-to.
You ask it to fetch.
It's the object that you,
when you create a new enterprise object,
you insert it into the editing context
so it'll be ready to get inserted
in the database the next time you
tell the editing context to save.
When you delete an object,
you have to tell the editing context.
When you have a bunch of changes
and you want to revert them,
you tell the editing context.
And whenever you change
an enterprise object,
the editing context is observing,
and so it notices those changes,
keeps track of that fact so it knows
to save those changes to the database.
So the editing context is
really your go-to object in EOF.
Now when you do ask an
editing context to fetch,
and that is essentially what
we did when we typed in action
and hit the submit button,
the editing context was asked, "Hey,
go get things that have
action as their category."
Coming down the stack,
the object store coordinator finds
out there's a fetch going on.
On the fly,
it actually creates these next
objects if they weren't there already.
We'll talk about what
they do in a moment.
Then the adapter is what
actually talks to the database.
So let's say that fetch category we
want action heads all the way down.
The JDBC adapter is going to
generate the SQL that actually
gets sent to the database,
and what it's going to get
back are called raw rows.
They're not fancy.
They're not enterprise objects.
They're just dictionaries
full of key-value pairs.
There's nothing particularly
special about them.
They're just raw data containers.
They also don't take advantage
of a lot of the nice features
and functionality of EOF.
That happens at the next layer up.
Those raw rows are handed from the
adapter layer up to the database layer
where a raw row is turned into an EO.
It's kind of like Pinocchio
becoming a real boy.
That's essentially what it is.
Instead of a wooden raw row,
you get a full-fledged object
with an object graph and the like.
At that time,
a very specific thing happens.
A snapshot is taken of that row.
That snapshot, as we'll see in a moment,
is maintained.
It's a very simple way to do that.
We'll see that snapshot is very important
when we talk about data freshness,
which we will do today.
So that snapshot occurs,
and at the same time,
that raw row is turned into an EO,
an enterprise object of the
correct class that you specified
in the model is created.
The data is populated.
Any related-- well,
we'll get to that in a moment,
because there's the EO.
And finally, besides that EO,
any relationships, a little object is
created called a fault.
It's a little placeholder that says,
well, you don't necessarily
need the studio right now,
or you don't necessarily need the list
of every time I've logged in that's
a related to many array right now.
Just put a little placeholder there.
When you ask for it, I'll go get it then.
Okay.
I'm going to go forward, but I forget.
That might take me too far.
Yes, it did.
Oh, no.
I've got to build it again.
Okay.
Quick review.
As they go by, remember what I said.
Everybody with me?
Excellent.
So looking at this,
when we talk about advanced topics,
it's good to have this
picture in your head.
It can be, you know,
you can use circles instead of
boxes in your head if you want.
It's your head.
But the basic structure
should remain the same.
And the things to think about are
the things that you often need to
think about are what's going on,
that relationship between
the EO and its snapshot,
what's going on with these faults,
when are they getting triggered.
Those tend to be very important control
points when talking about things like
memory management or data freshness of
your things that are in your EOF stack.
Now let's talk about a couple
of common configurations of EOF.
The first of which is
multiple editing contexts.
And so in addition to one editing
context on top of this stack,
we can have many.
And in fact,
this is the default configuration
of a WebObjects application.
Every user that shows up to
the site gets a new session.
Every session has a new default
editing context which sits on top of
the same object store coordinator.
What that means is that every session
has a new default editing context.
So what that means is that they
all share the same snapshot.
And so this is where some of
that caching comes into play,
where just because somebody
just showed up to your site,
doesn't necessarily mean that we have
to fetch everything once again for them,
because a snapshot from somebody else's
session might have already grabbed
that information and kept it in memory.
And so we can have that
same row in the database,
have a snapshot for it,
and have... I'm going to... Yeah,
there we go.
I'm having some clicker problems.
Okay.
So in this case,
these EOs could both be the same
row underneath in the database,
but they're in different
editing contexts,
which means that one user can
make some edits to it and then
decide not to save those edits.
The other could do the same,
but underneath both of
these EOs is a snapshot.
I'm having some clicker problems.
Okay.
So in this case,
these EOs could both be the same
row underneath in the database,
but they're in different
editing contexts,
which means
And we'll add two stacks.
Now, you say, well, wow, multiple stacks.
That sounds kind of out there.
But really,
as soon as you launch a second instance
of your WebObjects application,
you have a situation where
you have multiple stacks.
One app has one stack.
One app has the other stack.
And as we'll see here,
they can both deal with the
same row from the database,
but they have a different
set of snapshots.
One stack does not know
about the other stack.
And what essentially defines creating a
stack is that object store coordinator,
that middle center piece.
Okay.
That said, everybody, well, actually,
let's go back one.
Everybody have that clear in your mind.
So now we're going to talk about
memory management and then a
little bit about data freshness.
So memory management.
As I looked at this material,
I realized that I was using EOF circa
4.5 in my head rather than 5.2.3.
So, things to note:
the editing context is
using weak references,
so only things that it
actually needs to hold onto,
things that are pending inserts, deletes,
or edits, or updates,
need to be retained.
But the EO itself has a strong
reference back to its editing context.
This has a couple of caveats.
The first is that if you ask for
all the registered objects in an EO,
it's not particularly useful as some of
them may have been garbage collected.
You can, if you want the old behavior,
set retains registered objects,
which will do that on
the editing context.
The editing context subclass,
shared editing context,
always does use strong references,
I should say.
So faulting.
I talked a little bit before about that
kind of ghost object called a fault.
What that is, in essence,
is an empty shell of a
particular type of object.
So as this says, the size of the fault
is the size of the EO.
It's essentially created
using the constructor,
but not initialized with values to
defer the fetching of that value
until you need to access the object.
But what this means is that when
we fetched in that original movie,
there was a fault of a studio
kind of hanging out there,
taking up as much size as a studio.
Deferred faults allows a setting
that essentially allows that creation
of the fault even to be deferred,
so that there's this single shared
object that's standing in for the fault,
which is a stand-in for the real object,
that is more memory efficient.
So if you are extending
EO generic record,
you'll automatically
have deferred faulting.
Otherwise, you will want to-- if you're
using EO custom object,
you will want to override a method which
seems to have disappeared from the slide.
I think something like
uses deferred faulting.
You want to return true to that.
The reason why Awake from Fetch
and Awake from Insertion is up
here is that those two methods,
essentially if you look at the
process of creating a fault,
a constructor is called.
If you put your initialization
logic in that constructor,
well,
when that object is finally initialized,
it's going to pull information up from
perhaps a snapshot or the database,
and all the work you've
done might get overridden.
The appropriate place to put
initialization information is by
subclassing generic record and
then putting it in Awake from
Fetch or Awake from Insertion.
Some other notes, some good tips,
a blob of data.
You may want to factor that
out into its own table.
I think the canonical example is an
employee and their employee photo.
If you have some little app and you're
always just searching for first names
and email addresses and phone numbers,
you don't want to have to
bring their whole image in
because it's part of that row.
A better thing to do is to have a
2-1 relationship to another table
that stores the blob of data so that
you only have to bring in the image.
You only have to access it over
a relationship when you need it.
Some blobs might be better just to
store them in the file system and store
a path to the blob in your database.
Some other optimizations.
Sometimes you never use a
too-many class property,
so maybe you know that the
employee belongs to a department,
but in your particular app,
your department never needs
a list of all the employees.
By turning off that reverse too-many,
it can save that fault from being
created and save you some memory.
Also, some rarely used attributes,
like you might have that employee where
you're always looking up first name,
last name, email, but then they have all
this other chunk of data,
like their social security number
and all kinds of crazy stuff.
You might have just the employee
and then a join to a table that
has a lot more in the other table,
but that's used more rarely.
Another thing is you can actually
hard code a fetch that will do
the too-many relationship for you
so that it's not doing a join,
you're just using a fetch to
grab the objects that you need.
If you're using key-value coding,
the name of that method,
you can bind that up as
if it's a relationship.
Key-value coding won't know
how that array was provided,
it just knows there's a method name that
it finds and calls to return that array.
The shared editing context.
So the purpose of the
shared editing context is,
if we go back to that picture
of the stack in our head,
is that I mentioned that multiple
editing contexts can all deal with
the same exact row as a separate
EO in each editing context.
So there's memory used
for each EO in each row,
excuse me, in each editing context.
A shared editing context allows you
to fetch things into this shared
editing context that conceptually those
EOs are part of every other editing
context sitting on that EOF stack.
And so the memory is shared
not only for the snapshots,
but also for the EO.
There are some caveats to using this.
The first is that with that
shared editing context,
you cannot have any relationships
that go out of the EOs in that.
You can have things that point in,
but nothing going out.
Otherwise, you will hit trouble.
Let's see.
And you can't use it across stacks,
right?
It's sharing the same snapshot,
and it's only dealing with items
that are on the same EOF stack,
which means the same
object store coordinator.
Now what if you got tons and tons
and tons and tons and tons and tons
and tons and tons and tons of EOs?
Well, we've got a million EOs batching,
right?
You want to batch things up.
There are a few things that you can do.
One is you could use raw rows
because when you're using raw rows,
it's quicker.
You're not generating snapshots or EOs.
You're just getting those
raw dictionaries back,
which you can use to display.
Actually,
they're probably much more handy for
display purposes than for edit purposes.
Project Wonder also has
some nice reusable stuff,
such as a fetch
specification batch iterator,
which will let you fetch
things in by batch,
and also a way to get an object
count with a particular qualifier.
It's easy for you to build
that user interface that says,
now showing 1 through 10 of 7.2 million.
Has anybody here ever...
gone through 1 through 10 all the
way up to a million on a website.
You have?
That's a lot of time
you have on your hands.
Because most users won't go through
a million records on a website,
so often you want to give the
impression that you grabbed them all,
but not do so.
And then sort of the lowest level you
can possibly get is you can actually
go down to the very JDBC adapter,
the JDBC channel, and override fetchRow,
which is the kind of atomic
method that's fetching in every
single row from the result set.
You can override that method,
call the super so the
fetching happens for you,
and then you do something with the
data and return null for the method.
So EOF thinks nothing
came back for that row,
yet you've already
grabbed the information,
done something like aggregated
it or something of that nature,
and you get back all these results,
and the rest of EOF thinks
you got nothing back.
It's kind of tricky,
but it definitely works.
Okay,
that's some memory management stuff.
Now let's talk about data freshness.
So data freshness,
EOF is a big, big cache.
So those snapshots are caching.
And any time you have caching,
no matter the environment,
you have a data freshness
So, there are a lot of techniques and
features within EOF that deal with data
freshness and keeping your data fresh.
What I'm going to do now is rather
than go through them in slides,
let's go to a demo.
Let's go to the demo machine.
Let's get rid of this demo.
Boom.
So one thing I've found is that although
I have been through what refaulting is,
refreshing is, invalidating,
all of these various
things that deal with EOs,
That over time as I'm
developing with EOF,
their definitions get a
little fuzzy in my head,
especially when I have an app
that's running and working,
and then I have to rethink
through everything.
Okay, now,
this one's getting rid of the snapshot.
What's this doing?
What I did was I wrote a little app
that I call the Freshness Explorer.
It's a WebObjects app that
I think helps to illustrate,
much more than slides can,
what's going on with the EOF stack.
Great for this to pop on up.
Can't find server.
Let's see if we do the
old -- what was it?
Oh, okay.
Let's hit it once again.
Great.
Okay.
So this I call the Freshness Explorer.
It's essentially what we're
seeing here are two EOF stacks,
each one sitting on top of
an object store coordinator.
Then within each stack
is an editing context,
or two editing contexts,
both sitting on top of the same one,
displaying some pertinent information
about the editing context that
we'll chat about in a moment.
The related snapshot, if there is any.
Any SQL that that stack had sent to
the database in the last transaction.
And then finally,
doing a raw row fetch to get the actual
database row that we'll be talking about.
Let's fetch into this editing context,
as well as this editing context.
And so the first thing to talk
about is the idea of refaulting.
So we have fetched these objects in.
You'll notice that we have two EOs,
one in each editing context.
Here's the underlying snapshot,
which is holding onto this information.
And since we did a fetch,
there's a SQL transaction that occurred,
and here's the database underneath.
We can do some things to this EO.
The first thing we'll do is
something called refaulting.
And the behavior when you refault,
as you'll see, is...
That item is turned into a fault.
It's a fault.
The snapshot hangs around,
and nothing else is affected
in any other editing context.
If we touch the fault,
No SQL is generated.
The fault notices that
there's a snapshot and says,
"Okay, I'll use that information." Now,
if I have a pending edit with a fault,
so instead of Bob Jones,
let's say we're going to Robert Jones,
I'll submit but not save that change.
So that change is hanging out in that
Enterprise Object in the editing context.
Now if I refault,
It's turned into a fault.
I touch the fault.
Notice that refaulting loses
all of my pending edits.
So that is the behavior of refaulting.
You get that behavior by telling
an editing context to refault
an object and handing it the
object you wish to refault.
A smarter version of refaulting
is called refreshing.
So let's edit Robert once again.
And by refreshing, actually,
let's do two things.
Yeah, let's do that.
Now if I hit refresh,
A fault was created and then basically
refreshed from the snapshot with
the changes applied on top of it.
The granddaddy of all
data freshness things,
the sledgehammer is invalidate.
Okay.
Somebody likes the sledgehammer analogy.
So when you invalidate,
all sorts of things happen.
This object is turned into a fault.
The snapshot is discarded.
All other editing contexts
that have that row within it
also get turned into a fault,
and all pending edits are discarded.
So it's a very,
very draconian way to refresh things.
Let's fetch things back.
Here's one that I wasn't expecting,
which is when I refault,
the snapshot hangs around and
the thing turns into a fault.
But notice if I refault with
one EO and one editing context,
my snapshot disappears.
This is due to something called
snapshot reference counting,
which happens automatically.
When no EO is referring to that snapshot,
it goes away.
Now, I knew that in my head,
and I had always thought of that as
a memory management sort of thing.
Okay, we don't need it.
We can get rid of that memory.
But as I was building that,
that interaction was not apparent to
me until I was playing with this app.
So, that's kind of cool.
So let's fetch some things in and
talk about a couple of other items.
Let's go to this other stack.
You'll notice that if
I make a change over here,
like Robert Jones,
Submit that.
When I save the change,
I should have just submitted it.
No SQL got sent.
The database is the same.
Let's save the change.
You'll notice that what happens
when I save that change is
the snapshot gets updated,
some SQL gets sent,
so the database row is updated,
and in addition,
The other EO is turned into a fault.
As soon as it gets touched,
it has the latest values.
So now we have a data
freshness conundrum.
One stack has made a change,
and so Robert Jones is here,
but we still have Bob Jones.
And as long as I refault and touch
the fault and refault and touch the
fault and refresh and touch the fault,
I'm not getting Robert Jones.
So I'd fetch.
Well, if I fetch,
I still don't have Robert Jones.
When you fetch, EOF is, as I said before,
a big old cache.
And it is an aggressive big old cache.
So when you fetch,
the main reason it's hitting the
database is not because it's concerned
about the stuff you already have.
It's concerned because there
might be rows in there that
meet the fetch criteria that
you haven't already grabbed.
So anything you already have, by default,
if you have a snapshot, it'll say, "Okay,
I got that.
I don't have to look at it."
The key toggle there is on
that fetch specification to
refresh the refetched objects.
So check that off.
And now we'll get Robert coming in.
Since the snapshot has changed,
any other EOs in other editing
contexts are turned into a fault.
So we'll touch the fault.
Often using a fetch with refreshing
refetched objects is the most
direct and efficient way to refetch
Fresh,
a large amount of items at the same time,
especially if it's a well-known
group of data or set of data that
you can fit into a qualifier.
All right,
so everybody's now Robert Jones.
Yes, yes.
Now let's make the EOF stack number two.
Let's say it's Robert Cray.
Touch the fault there.
And so now we have a data
freshness issue over here.
[Transcript missing]
can be a source of confusion sometimes.
Has anybody found it to be a
source of confusion at times?
Some nodding heads.
What's going on with the
fetch timestamp is this.
When you create an editing context,
By default,
a timestamp is put on it that's an
hour previous to when it was created.
So we showed up here and started
running this at about 9:15.
Excuse me, at about 11:15.
And so the timestamp on all of these
editing contexts is at about 10:15,
an hour before this thing was created.
And that will never, ever, ever,
ever change on that editing context
unless you change it yourself.
What this means is that any time that
editing context looks at a snapshot,
it's going to say, or 10:15,
if it's later than 10:15,
it's fine with me.
It's fresh enough.
So you'll notice that here
we have a fetch timestamp.
Every time a snapshot is created,
it gets a timestamp.
In this case, 11:19:08.
So no matter what we do,
without changing the
editing context timestamp,
things that are fetched in by that
editing context are going to have a
timestamp later than its timestamp.
Which means that if I refault,
Touch the fault, refault,
touch the fault.
I keep using that snapshot.
One mechanism for data freshness
is to update the fetch timestamp
in the editing context.
In this case, we'll update it to now.
Now it's 11:24.
Now 11:24 is later than 11:19.
So now if I refault,
when I touch that fault,
It's going to notice
11.24 is later than 11.19.
It will hit the database,
pull back the freshest values,
make a new snapshot, and there you go.
Okay, is there any other items that
I wanted to chat about here?
That's about it.
Let's go back to slides.
So I intend to have that available.
I find it -- oh, cool.
Just in building it and playing with it,
I know I learned some things.
The other thing is that
I think that often we get,
I'm refaulting or I'm
doing this one thing,
and we think about it in isolation.
What I like about playing with that,
because that's essentially what
we're doing is playing with it,
is that you see interactions between
these different techniques that you may
not have noticed or thought about before,
but they're very obvious to you
when you see them graphically.
I think I'll be using that a
lot now that I've built it.
Great.
Data freshness.
Now, since... Oh, there's my slide.
So since we don't have kind of a way for
that demo to get to everybody else who
might not be seeing this session live,
we're going to have some
slides so they'll see it.
But I'm going to crank through these
because we've already talked about
most of this stuff in the demo.
So refaulting, again,
affects that one editing context.
We saw that it turned into a fault.
We touched the fault.
It uses the snapshot
if it is fresh enough.
It doesn't affect any
other editing contexts.
And there's no database round
trip unless for some reason,
for example,
that snapshot isn't fresh enough.
We can't use that existing snapshot.
Invalidating is that--
Sledgehammer approach.
All editing contexts
lose all pending edits.
The snapshot's thrown out,
and then the database is hit.
Now, invalidating is pretty heavy-handed.
There are some things you can do.
You can imagine we had one object.
So, okay, I invalidate,
and then I touch the fault,
and then I get one fetch to the database.
But imagine, you know,
you're displaying that million records.
Well, let's say a couple thousand
records that you have,
and you say, invalidate all objects.
Now, every time you touch
one of those objects,
it's a separate transaction,
a separate fetch to the
database by default.
So, get that one.
You have some repetition
you're displaying on a page,
and it's like, hit the database.
Oh, I need another one.
Hit the database.
Oh.
And it does that thousands of times,
which is obviously a performance hit.
One thing that you can do to prevent
that is to set batch faulting,
which is set in that very
important model file.
And the idea behind batch faulting
is you set a batch number,
and it's sort of like when you're at
home and somebody else is up at the
refrigerator while you're watching TV.
And you say, while you're up...
Why don't you get me something too?
So batch faulting essentially saying,
while you're going to the
database to get one studio,
you might as well bring back 10 or 100
or whatever number as you go through
this seems to make sense for your
data set and the size of your data.
That will definitely
increase the performance.
Manually fetching to restore
snapshots using refreshes,
refetched objects is potentially
even better because you're not
relying on the infrastructure.
You're specifically saying,
I want these particular objects
that match this particular
criteria to get fetched at
this particular moment in time,
returned to me and refreshed.
So that's very precise control.
And while you're doing that,
you can use prefetching.
Which are key paths that you specify
along with the fetch that say,
while you're down there
getting all these,
in this case, movies,
bring back the related studio.
And so you will get not only a
fresh version of all the movies,
but a fresh version of
all the related studios,
all within the same database transaction.
Refresh Objects.
We hit on that briefly.
It's like Refault Object,
except it is not going to throw
away pending updates or inserts,
and it will use that
existing row snapshot.
Playing with this,
the behavior is that if there are no
changes to the object that you refresh,
it actually turns it into a fault.
If there are pending changes
within the request-response loop,
it seems to turn it into a fault,
unfault it, and apply the changes.
Data freshness.
This is one that, again,
I think is much easier to see the results
of it than to explain the results of it.
But again,
you make a new editing context,
it gets a timestamp of an hour ago.
So you show up at 10:00 AM, a user does,
it gets a 9:00 AM timestamp.
It's an absolute time,
and unless you do something,
that timestamp never changes.
Anytime a snapshot is created,
it gets a timestamp.
Those two are compared.
If the snapshot is too old,
then that snapshot will not be
used the next time that editing
context is trying to use it.
What you might do,
and what I do in the source code,
is I just tell that editing context to
set its timestamp to something else.
You know, make a new NS timestamp.
You can do that perhaps
when the session wakes up,
so that every time that
user has a new transaction,
you update the timestamp.
And that then turns it into
more of a rolling window,
so that every time a transaction occurs,
and then some faulting occurs,
you can make sure that it updates.
And then again,
the set refreshes refetched objects,
and the prefetching.
Now, if you want to go just crazy,
you can go to the EO database,
which was on our model.
It's the object that's actually
maintaining all of those snapshots,
and you can mess with them directly.
So an EO Global ID for you new folks,
it's simply an object that is a unique
identifier for an enterprise object.
And it's how you basically map up
what snapshots go with what EOs.
For database folks,
it's basically the name of the entity
and the primary key information.
Shh, don't tell anybody I told you.
Cheating at faulting.
Essentially,
you can record your own snapshots.
You get the global ID and you say,
here's the snapshot for
that particular object.
So if you happen to have
gotten it from some raw row
fetching or some other means,
you can just provide it,
potentially saving a
fetch to the database.
Pre-flighting too many relationships.
So sometimes you have a
new enterprise object and,
you know, a department that's brand new
does not have any employees.
Yet, EOF doesn't know that necessarily
there are no employees in the database.
So if you go to touch that relationship,
it is going to automatically do
a fetch to look for employees.
You know that there aren't any
because you just made the department.
So you can use this method,
record snapshot for source global ID,
to hand it an empty array so
that it thinks that it has,
well, it will have a snapshot that says
there's nothing related to it.
Therefore,
it's not going to hit the database
if you access the too many arrays
of that newly inserted object.
And if you want to just blow away
the snapshot for a too many so
that the next time it's accessed,
it is absolutely positively refreshed,
you can use that same method and
hand in null instead of an array,
which will get rid of
that too many snapshot.
And so the next time that
object with that GID and that
relationship name is accessed,
it'll say, I don't have a snapshot.
Better go get fresh
information from the database.
Again, this is very low level stuff.
More likely you would want to use, say,
a fetch specification with
prefetching necessarily before
having to revert to this.
And then when you're doing this
stuff at the EO database level,
we'll talk about
multi-threading in a moment,
you want to lock and unlock
the object store coordinator.
That multi-threading.
I can't go through all of
concurrent programming right now.
We have only six minutes left.
So there are a lot of good books.
As we talk,
I'm assuming that you have some knowledge
of concurrent programming in Java and
concurrent programming in general.
There's some good docs on this in the
What's New in WebObjects 5.2 docs.
Java apps, always multi-threaded.
Here are some examples
of multi-threading.
Finalization, timers, session timeouts,
if you do your own threads,
notifications.
So you cannot,
it is impossible to write an
EOF application in WebObjects.
So you cannot write an EOF application
that is completely unmulti-threaded,
which means we need to deal with it.
Use try finally.
So try to do something
like locking a resource.
We'll tell you in a moment
what you need to lock.
Then in the finally block, unlock it.
So if any problems occur,
that finally block is always called and
you don't deadlock your application.
Essentially,
if an object in EOF or WebObjects
Foundation does not have a lock on it,
you need to protect it.
Either with a synchronized block or using
your own lock or some way of doing it.
So that's arrays and dictionaries.
You need to lock those or deal with
the concurrent issues yourself.
For things like editing contexts,
the object store coordinator,
you can lock those.
It has the API to do so.
You can also use try lock on an
NS recurring lock or an editing
context so that you won't block as you
see is this thing able to lock for me
or does somebody else have the lock.
As you're debugging,
you can use control slash or kill
quit with the PID to produce a stack
trace by thread as to what's going on.
The commercial products optimize
it in JProbe are also very,
very handy.
As you're using an editing context,
if you're using a nested editing context,
you need to lock the
nested editing context.
Even though it is using
its parent's lock,
you still do need to lock
that child editing context.
The shared editing context locks itself.
So it's the one exception
that proves the rule.
That's the one that locks itself.
Everything else you need to do yourself.
You need to always lock the editing
context whenever you're using any of
its Enterprise Objects in your own code.
So even if you're doing
some read-only stuff,
you still need to lock the EO--excuse me,
lock the editing context,
do whatever stuff you're doing in code,
and then unlock the editing context.
If you're operating at a lower level
than your EOs in editing context,
you'll want to lock the object
store coordinator instead,
as we talked about
with EO database stuff.
So that is showing us that that
object store coordinator is,
in essence, that root object.
It is the thing that,
around which all this locking is based,
is that object store coordinator.
So remaining things to be careful
of as you're bopping around EOF,
locking around the model,
notification center, and entity.
In WebObjects,
they have a method that allows
concurrent request handling,
which has nothing whatsoever
to do with EOF multi-threading.
It has to do with whether WebObjects
applications are handling incoming
requests in a multi-threaded manner.
That doesn't have anything to
do with whether you've turned
on multi-threading in EOF.
As we've just said, it's always to some
degree multi-threaded.
So, some things to watch out for.
Intersecting locks where you need to have
this lock and this lock to be able to
do something and then release this lock.
There's more possibility for deadlock.
Keeping things as dead,
awful simple as possible to solve
the problem is the best bet.
When you synchronize some methods,
they're not just fancy keywords,
there's an object lock going on there.
And so when you're in a synchronized
block and then you lock something
else or do a blocking operation,
nothing else is able to get into the
synchronized block of that object,
any synchronized method of that object,
until that code is released.
So, try to keep your blocking code locked
by out of the synchronized blocks,
but possibly using wait and
notify or recursive locks.
Concurrent database access.
So, this is
pretty fun.
Concurrent database access,
the general idea is you
have multiple EOF stacks.
Each stack, again, with an object store
coordinator of its own,
is able to have concurrent
access to the database.
So you want two things
hitting the database,
make two stacks.
That's the takeaway, basically.
Each of those stacks has
its own set of locks,
database channels, snapshot cache.
Since you do potentially
have the overhead of multiple
snapshots for each of those,
this is especially handy if
you're fetching raw rows,
because there's no overhead
with snapshots or EOs or
notifications going on.
You're just getting back an
array of dictionaries that
you can do with what you will,
which can be very handy if
potentially you're doing an
app where you're doing a lot of
fetching in and displaying of stuff,
potentially with a little
less editing going on.
To make one is dirt simple.
You make an object store
coordinator that takes no arguments.
At that point, you've just made the
basis of a new EOF stack.
Then make a new editing context and
hand in that object store coordinator
as the argument to the constructor,
and then start using
that editing context.
All of the objects beneath
the scenes that are doing the
SQL generation that I'd like are
created for you automatically the
first time you touch the database.
I mentioned raw rows already.
And the actual concurrency,
it should be noted,
depends on how you have
your database configured.
Sometimes it's a configuration
issue with the database.
Sometimes it's a money issue with the
database where you can only have so many
connections because of your license.
But oftentimes the reason why
you might not have a database is
because you don't have a database.
The reason why you might not be
seeing concurrency is that you
haven't configured the database
right or you haven't paid the
database company enough money.
Okay, so we've reviewed some basics,
some memory management, data freshness,
multi-threading,
and concurrent database access.
For more info, there's documentation up
in the reference library.
There's who to contact.
Andreas, Bob, Catherine Wentz.
And enterprise-level WebObjects
support and consulting.
I don't see anybody jotting down,
so I'll go on.
The reference library.
And now let's have some folks up for Q&A.
Thank you.